.TH SDME 1 "2026-03-03" "sdme" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
sdme \- lightweight systemd\-nspawn containers with overlayfs
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sdme
[\fB\-v\fR] [\fB\-c\fR \fIpath\fR]
.I command
[\fIargs\fR...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B sdme
manages lightweight containers using
.BR systemd\-nspawn (1)
with overlayfs copy\-on\-write storage.
Each container uses an imported root filesystem as its read\-only lower layer,
keeping the base rootfs untouched while all modifications are stored in a
per\-container upper layer.
.PP
Containers are managed as systemd template units
.RB ( sdme@.service )
with
.B Type=notify
and controlled via D\-Bus.
The unit is considered active only after
.BR systemd\-nspawn (1)
sends its readiness notification, and a 2\-minute startup timeout
catches hung boots.
Interactive access uses
.BR machinectl (1).
.PP
.B sdme
requires root privileges.
When invoked via
.BR sudo (8),
the invoking user's configuration file is preferred.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Enable verbose output.
Implies non\-interactive mode at runtime.
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-config " " \fIpath\fR
Path to config file.
Default:
.IR ~/.config/sdme/sdmerc .
.SH COMMANDS
.SS sdme new [\fIname\fR] [\-r \fIfs\fR] [\-t \fIseconds\fR] [\-u] [\fIlimits\fR] [\fInetwork\fR] [\fIsecurity\fR] [\-o \fIdir\fR]... [\-\-pod \fIpod\fR] [\-\-oci\-pod \fIpod\fR] [\-b \fIbind\fR]... [\-e \fIenv\fR]... [\-\-oci\-env \fIKEY=VALUE\fR]... [\-\-enable] [\-\-no\-oci\-ports] [\-\-no\-oci\-volumes] [\-\-] [\fIcommand\fR...]
Create, start, and enter a new container.
If
.I name
is omitted, a name is generated automatically.
If
.B \-r
is omitted, the host filesystem is used.
Use
.B \-t
to override the boot timeout (default: 60 seconds or the
.B boot_timeout
config value).
An optional command overrides the default login shell.
.PP
Resource limits can be set with
.BR \-\-memory ,
.BR \-\-cpus ,
and
.BR \-\-cpu\-weight ;
see
.B RESOURCE LIMITS
below.
.PP
Network options can be set with
.BR \-\-private\-network ,
.BR \-\-network\-veth ,
.BR \-\-network\-bridge ,
.BR \-\-network\-zone ,
and
.BR \-\-port ;
see
.B NETWORKING
below.
.PP
Use
.B \-o
to make directories opaque in the overlayfs upper layer (hides lower layer
contents); see
.B OVERLAYFS OPAQUE DIRS
below.
.PP
Use
.B \-b
to add bind mounts and
.B \-e
to set environment variables; see
.B BIND MOUNTS AND ENVIRONMENT
below.
.PP
Use
.B \-\-oci\-env
to set environment variables for the OCI app service (written to
.IR /oci/env
in the overlayfs upper layer); see
.B OCI ENVIRONMENT
below.
.PP
Use
.B \-\-pod
to join a pod network namespace (entire container); see
.B PODS
below.
Use
.B \-\-oci\-pod
to join a pod network namespace for the OCI app process only; see
.B PODS
below.
.PP
Use
.B \-u
/
.B \-\-userns
to enable user namespace isolation; see
.B USER NAMESPACES
below.
.PP
Use
.B \-\-enable
to enable auto\-start on boot via systemd.
.PP
Security hardening options can be set with
.BR \-\-strict ,
.BR \-\-hardened ,
.BR \-\-drop\-capability ,
.BR \-\-capability ,
.BR \-\-no\-new\-privileges ,
.BR \-\-read\-only ,
.BR \-\-system\-call\-filter ,
and
.BR \-\-apparmor\-profile ;
see
.B SECURITY HARDENING
below.
.PP
If boot fails or is interrupted (Ctrl+C), the just\-created container is
automatically removed.
.SS sdme create [\fIname\fR] [\-r \fIfs\fR] [\-u] [\fIlimits\fR] [\fInetwork\fR] [\fIsecurity\fR] [\-o \fIdir\fR]... [\-\-pod \fIpod\fR] [\-\-oci\-pod \fIpod\fR] [\-b \fIbind\fR]... [\-e \fIenv\fR]... [\-\-oci\-env \fIKEY=VALUE\fR]... [\-\-enable] [\-\-no\-oci\-ports] [\-\-no\-oci\-volumes]
Create a new container without starting it.
Sets up the overlayfs directories and state file.
Resource limits can be set with
.BR \-\-memory ,
.BR \-\-cpus ,
and
.BR \-\-cpu\-weight ;
see
.B RESOURCE LIMITS
below.
Network options can be set with
.BR \-\-private\-network ,
.BR \-\-network\-veth ,
.BR \-\-network\-bridge ,
.BR \-\-network\-zone ,
and
.BR \-\-port ;
see
.B NETWORKING
below.
Use
.B \-o
to make directories opaque in the overlayfs upper layer; see
.B OVERLAYFS OPAQUE DIRS
below.
Use
.B \-b
to add bind mounts and
.B \-e
to set environment variables; see
.B BIND MOUNTS AND ENVIRONMENT
below.
Use
.B \-\-oci\-env
to set environment variables for the OCI app service; see
.B OCI ENVIRONMENT
below.
Use
.B \-\-pod
to join a pod network namespace (entire container); see
.B PODS
below.
Use
.B \-\-oci\-pod
to join a pod network namespace for the OCI app process only; see
.B PODS
below.
Use
.B \-u
/
.B \-\-userns
to enable user namespace isolation; see
.B USER NAMESPACES
below.
.PP
Use
.B \-\-enable
to enable auto\-start on boot via systemd.
.PP
Security hardening options can be set with
.BR \-\-strict ,
.BR \-\-hardened ,
.BR \-\-drop\-capability ,
.BR \-\-capability ,
.BR \-\-no\-new\-privileges ,
.BR \-\-read\-only ,
.BR \-\-system\-call\-filter ,
and
.BR \-\-apparmor\-profile ;
see
.B SECURITY HARDENING
below.
.PP
Requires a permissive umask (see
.B NOTES
below).
.SS sdme start \fIname\fR... [\-t \fIseconds\fR] [\-\-all]
Start one or more stopped containers.
Installs or updates the
.B sdme@.service
template unit if needed, then starts each unit via D\-Bus.
Containers are started sequentially; if one fails to boot, it is stopped
and the remaining containers are still attempted.
.PP
Use
.B \-\-all
to start all stopped containers.
Use
.B \-t
to override the boot timeout (default: 60 seconds or the
.B boot_timeout
config value).
.PP
If boot fails or is interrupted (Ctrl+C), the container is stopped but
preserved on disk for debugging.
.SS sdme set \fIname\fR [\-\-memory \fIsize\fR] [\-\-cpus \fIn\fR] [\-\-cpu\-weight \fIw\fR]
Set resource limits on an existing container, replacing all current limits.
Flags that are not provided are cleared.
See
.B RESOURCE LIMITS
below for details on each flag.
.PP
If the container is running, a note is printed advising a restart for the
changes to take effect.
.SS sdme join \fIname\fR [\-\-start] [\-t \fIseconds\fR] [\-\-] [\fIcommand\fR...]
Enter a running container using
.BR machinectl (1)
shell.
An optional command overrides the default login shell.
.PP
Use
.B \-\-start
to start the container first if it is stopped.
Use
.B \-t
to override the boot timeout when combined with
.BR \-\-start .
.SS sdme exec [\-\-oci] \fIname\fR \fIcommand\fR [\fIargs\fR...]
Run a one\-off command in a running container using
.BR machinectl (1)
shell.
.PP
Use
.B \-\-oci
to run the command inside the OCI app root
.RI ( /oci/root )
via
.BR systemd\-run (1)
with
.BR RootDirectory=/oci/root .
This is useful for running app\-specific tools (e.g.\& redis\-cli, pg_isready)
without needing chroot installed in the container.
.SS sdme stop [\-a] [\-\-term] [\-\-kill] \fIname\fR...
Stop one or more running containers.
The default mode sends SIGRTMIN+4 to the container leader for a clean
shutdown (90 second timeout).
Use
.B \-a
to stop all running containers (cannot be combined with names).
.TP
.B \-\-term
Terminate mode: sends SIGTERM to the nspawn leader process (30 second timeout).
.TP
.B \-\-kill
Force-kill mode: sends SIGKILL to all container processes (15 second timeout).
.PP
.B \-\-term
and
.B \-\-kill
are mutually exclusive.
.SS sdme rm [\-a] [\-f] \fIname\fR...
Remove one or more containers.
Running containers are stopped first.
Deletes the state file and all overlayfs directories.
Use
.B \-a
to remove all containers (cannot be combined with names).
Use
.B \-f
to skip confirmation prompts (useful for scripting).
.SS sdme ps
List all containers with their status, health, and detected OS.
A POD column is shown when any container uses \fB\-\-pod\fR.
An OCI\-POD column is shown when any container uses \fB\-\-oci\-pod\fR.
A USERNS column is shown when any container uses \fB\-\-userns\fR.
A BINDS column is shown when any container has bind mounts configured.
An ENABLED column is shown when any container has auto\-start enabled.
Health checks detect broken containers (missing directories, missing rootfs).
The OS column shows the distro name from the rootfs os\-release file.
.SS sdme enable \fIname\fR...
Enable one or more containers to start automatically on boot.
Creates a systemd
.B wants
symlink so the container's unit starts at boot time.
.SS sdme disable \fIname\fR...
Disable auto\-start for one or more containers.
Removes the systemd
.B wants
symlink.
.SS sdme logs [\-\-oci] \fIname\fR [\fIargs\fR...]
View container logs by executing
.BR journalctl (1)
for the container's service unit.
Extra arguments are passed through to journalctl
(e.g.\&
.BR \-f ,
.BR "\-n 100" ).
.PP
Use
.B \-\-oci
to show logs for the OCI app service
.RI ( sdme\-oci\-app.service )
instead of the container unit.
This runs journalctl inside the container via
.BR machinectl (1).
.SS sdme fs import \fIname\fR \fIsource\fR [\-f] [\-\-install\-packages \fImode\fR] [\-\-oci\-mode \fImode\fR] [\-\-base\-fs \fIrootfs\fR]
Import a root filesystem.
After import, systemd is detected in the rootfs; if missing, distro\-specific
packages can be installed via chroot.
The
.B \-\-install\-packages
flag controls this:
.B auto
(default) prompts interactively; in non\-interactive mode (e.g.\& with
.BR \-v ),
refuses and suggests re\-running with
.B \-\-install\-packages=yes
or
.BR \-f .
.B yes
always installs.
.B no
refuses if systemd is absent.
.PP
For OCI registry images, the
.B \-\-oci\-mode
flag controls how the image is classified:
.RS
.TP
.B auto
(default) Auto\-detect from image config.
Base OS images have no entrypoint, a shell as default command, and no exposed
ports.
Everything else is treated as an application image.
.TP
.B base
Force base OS mode.
The rootfs goes through systemd detection and package installation.
Use this for OS images that the heuristic misclassifies.
.TP
.B app
Force application mode.
Requires
.B \-\-base\-fs
to specify a systemd\-capable rootfs as the base layer.
.RE
.PP
The
.B \-\-base\-fs
flag specifies a previously imported rootfs (with systemd) to use as the base
layer for OCI application images.
The application rootfs is placed under
.I /oci/root
inside a copy of the base, and a systemd service unit
.RI ( sdme\-oci\-app.service )
is generated to run the application's entrypoint via
.BR RootDirectory=/oci/root .
OCI metadata (environment, ports, volumes) is saved under
.IR /oci/ .
See
.I docs/oci.md
for a full walkthrough.
.PP
The source type is auto\-detected:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.B URL
.RI ( http:// " or " https:// ):
download and extract tarball.
.IP \(bu 2
.B Registry image
.RI ( registry/repo:tag ):
pull from an OCI\-compatible registry using the OCI Distribution Spec
(e.g.\&
.IR quay.io/fedora/fedora:latest ).
Supports anonymous bearer token authentication and manifest list platform
selection.
.IP \(bu 2
.B Directory:
copy the directory tree.
.IP \(bu 2
.B QCOW2 image
(detected by magic bytes):
mount via
.BR qemu\-nbd (8)
and copy the filesystem tree.
.IP \(bu 2
.B Tarball
.RI ( .tar ", " .tar.gz ", " .tar.bz2 ", " .tar.xz ", " .tar.zst ):
extract using native Rust crates with magic\-byte compression detection.
OCI container images are auto\-detected after extraction and their filesystem
layers are applied in order with whiteout handling.
.RE
.PP
Use
.B \-f
to remove a leftover staging directory from a previous failed import.
.SS sdme fs ls
List imported root filesystems with distro detection and paths.
.SS sdme fs rm [\-a] [\-f] \fIname\fR...
Remove one or more imported root filesystems.
Use
.B \-a
to remove all imported root filesystems (cannot be combined with names).
Use
.B \-f
to skip confirmation prompts.
.SS sdme fs build \fIname\fR \fIbuild.conf\fR [\-t \fIseconds\fR] [\-f]
Build a root filesystem from a build config file.
Creates a temporary staging container from the base rootfs specified by
.BR FROM ,
executes
.B RUN
and
.B COPY
directives sequentially, then captures the resulting merged
filesystem as a new rootfs named
.IR name .
.PP
Use
.B \-t
to override the boot timeout (default: 60 seconds or the
.B boot_timeout
config value).
Use
.B \-f
to replace an existing rootfs with the same name.
.PP
The staging container is automatically removed after the build completes
or on failure/Ctrl+C.
.PP
The build config is a line\-oriented text file with three directives:
.RS
.TP
.BI FROM " rootfs"
Base rootfs to build on (must be first directive, required, only once).
Must refer to a rootfs previously imported with
.BR "sdme fs import" .
.TP
.BI RUN " command"
Run a shell command inside the container via
.BR /bin/sh\ \-c .
Supports pipes, redirects, and compound commands.
The container is started automatically if not already running.
.TP
.BI COPY " src dst"
Copy a host file or directory into the rootfs.
The container is stopped before copying (overlayfs constraint).
If
.I dst
is an existing directory, the source is placed inside it.
Destination paths with
.B ..
components are rejected.
.PP
Because COPY writes directly to the overlayfs upper layer (while the
container is stopped), destinations under directories that systemd mounts
tmpfs over at boot are rejected:
.BR /tmp ", " /run ", " /dev/shm .
Files placed there would be hidden by the tmpfs and invisible inside the
running container.
Destinations under overlayfs opaque directories are also rejected.
Use a different path (e.g.\&
.BR /root ", " /opt ", " /srv ).
.RE
.PP
Lines starting with
.B #
and blank lines are ignored.
.SS sdme pod new \fIname\fR
Create a new pod network namespace.
Allocates a network namespace with loopback up, bind\-mounts it to
.IR /run/sdme/pods/ name /netns,
and writes persistent state to
.IR /var/lib/sdme/pods/ name /state.
.SS sdme pod ls
List all pods with their active/inactive status and creation timestamp.
A pod is active when its runtime bind\-mount exists under
.IR /run/sdme/pods/ .
.SS sdme pod rm [\-f] \fIname\fR...
Remove one or more pods.
Unmounts the runtime netns, removes the runtime directory, and deletes the
persistent state directory.
Refuses if any container references the pod (via
.B POD
or
.B OCI_POD
keys) unless
.B \-f
is given.
.SS sdme config get
Show current configuration values.
.SS sdme config apparmor\-profile
Print the default AppArmor profile for sdme containers to stdout.
The profile is named
.B sdme\-default
and is designed for systemd\-nspawn system containers.
To install:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sdme config apparmor\-profile > /etc/apparmor.d/sdme\-default
apparmor_parser \-r /etc/apparmor.d/sdme\-default
.fi
.RE
.PP
The profile is automatically applied when using
.BR \-\-strict .
It can also be applied manually with
.BR "\-\-apparmor\-profile sdme\-default" .
The deb and rpm packages install and load the profile automatically.
.SS sdme config completions \fIshell\fR
Generate shell completions for the specified shell.
Supported shells:
.BR bash ", " fish ", " zsh .
Example:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sdme config completions bash > /etc/bash_completion.d/sdme
sdme config completions zsh > /usr/local/share/zsh/site\-functions/_sdme
sdme config completions fish > ~/.config/fish/completions/sdme.fish
.fi
.RE
.SS sdme config set \fIkey\fR \fIvalue\fR
Set a configuration value.
Valid keys:
.RS
.TP
.B interactive
Enable or disable interactive mode.
Values:
.BR yes " or " no .
Default:
.BR yes .
.TP
.B datadir
Absolute path to the data directory.
Default:
.BR /var/lib/sdme .
.TP
.B boot_timeout
Boot timeout in seconds.
Values: positive integer.
Default:
.BR 60 .
.TP
.B join_as_sudo_user
Automatically join host\-rootfs containers as the
.B SUDO_USER
instead of root.
Values:
.BR yes " or " no .
Default:
.BR yes .
.TP
.B host_rootfs_opaque_dirs
Comma\-separated list of directories to make opaque by default when creating
host\-rootfs containers (no
.BR \-r ).
Explicit
.B \-o
flags override this setting.
Set to an empty string to disable.
Default:
.BR /etc/systemd/system,/var/log .
.TP
.B hardened_drop_caps
Comma\-separated list of capabilities to drop when
.B \-\-hardened
is used.
Set to an empty string to disable all hardened capability drops.
Default:
.BR CAP_SYS_PTRACE,CAP_NET_RAW,CAP_SYS_RAWIO,CAP_SYS_BOOT .
.RE
.SH CONFIGURATION
The configuration file is in TOML format, located at
.IR ~/.config/sdme/sdmerc .
When running under
.BR sudo (8),
the invoking user's config is preferred if it exists.
The path can also be set via the
.B \-c
option or the
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
environment variable.
.PP
Available keys:
.TP
.B interactive
Boolean.
Whether to run in interactive mode.
Default:
.BR true .
.TP
.B datadir
String.
Absolute path to the data directory.
Default:
.BR /var/lib/sdme .
.TP
.B boot_timeout
Integer.
Number of seconds to wait for a container to finish booting before giving up.
Can be overridden per\-command with
.BR \-t / \-\-timeout .
Default:
.BR 60 .
.TP
.B join_as_sudo_user
Boolean.
When true and the container uses the host root filesystem,
.B sdme join
and
.B sdme exec
pass
.BI \-\-uid " SUDO_USER"
to
.BR machinectl (1)
so the session runs as the invoking user rather than root.
Containers created with an imported rootfs are unaffected.
Default:
.BR true .
.TP
.B host_rootfs_opaque_dirs
String.
Comma\-separated list of absolute directory paths to make opaque in the overlayfs
upper layer when creating host\-rootfs containers (i.e., when
.B \-r
is not specified).
Opaque directories hide all lower\-layer contents, so they start empty in the
container.
If the user passes one or more
.B \-o
flags at creation time, this config value is ignored.
Containers created with an imported rootfs are unaffected.
Set to an empty string to disable default opaque dirs.
Default:
.BR /etc/systemd/system,/var/log .
.TP
.B hardened_drop_caps
String.
Comma\-separated list of Linux capabilities to drop when
.B \-\-hardened
is used.
Capabilities are validated against the known set.
Set to an empty string to disable all hardened capability drops.
Default:
.BR CAP_SYS_PTRACE,CAP_NET_RAW,CAP_SYS_RAWIO,CAP_SYS_BOOT .
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /var/lib/sdme/
Default data directory (configurable via
.BR datadir ).
.TP
.I /var/lib/sdme/fs/\fIname\fR/
Imported root filesystems (lower layers).
.TP
.I /var/lib/sdme/state/\fIname\fR
Container state files (KEY=VALUE format).
Contains container metadata including creation timestamp, rootfs name,
resource limits
.RB ( MEMORY ", " CPUS ", " CPU_WEIGHT ),
network configuration
.RB ( PRIVATE_NETWORK ", " NETWORK_VETH ", " NETWORK_BRIDGE ", " NETWORK_ZONE ", " PORTS ),
opaque directories
.RB ( OPAQUE_DIRS ),
bind mounts
.RB ( BINDS ),
environment variables
.RB ( ENVS ),
pod membership
.RB ( POD ", " OCI_POD ),
user namespace isolation
.RB ( USERNS ),
OCI volumes
.RB ( OCI_VOLUMES ),
and security hardening
.RB ( DROP_CAPS ", " ADD_CAPS ", " NO_NEW_PRIVS ", " READ_ONLY ", " SYSCALL_FILTER ", " APPARMOR_PROFILE ).
.TP
.I /var/lib/sdme/volumes/\fIname\fR/
Per\-container OCI volume data (created automatically for OCI images that
declare volumes).
Survives container removal; must be deleted manually to reclaim disk space.
.TP
.I /var/lib/sdme/containers/\fIname\fR/upper/
Per\-container overlayfs upper layer (copy\-on\-write modifications).
.TP
.I /var/lib/sdme/containers/\fIname\fR/work/
Per\-container overlayfs work directory.
.TP
.I /var/lib/sdme/containers/\fIname\fR/merged/
Per\-container overlayfs merged mount point.
.TP
.I /var/lib/sdme/pods/\fIname\fR/state
Pod persistent state file (KEY=VALUE format).
.TP
.I /run/sdme/pods/\fIname\fR/netns
Pod runtime bind\-mount of the network namespace fd (volatile, recreated
after reboot when a container referencing the pod is started).
.TP
.I /etc/systemd/system/sdme@.service
Systemd template unit (auto\-installed and auto\-updated).
Uses
.B Type=notify
so the service is considered started only after
.BR systemd\-nspawn (1)
signals readiness.
Exit code 133 is treated as a successful clean shutdown.
.TP
.I /etc/systemd/system/sdme@\fIname\fR.service.d/limits.conf
Per\-container resource limits drop\-in (created when limits are set,
removed when limits are cleared or the container is deleted).
.TP
.I ~/.config/sdme/sdmerc
User configuration file (TOML format).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SUDO_USER
When set, sdme reads the invoking user's configuration file and resolves
their home directory for config file lookup.
.TP
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
Overrides the base directory for the configuration file.
Default:
.IR ~/.config .
.TP
.B HOME
Used to locate the configuration file when
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
is not set.
.TP
.BR https_proxy ", " HTTPS_PROXY ", " http_proxy ", " HTTP_PROXY ", " all_proxy ", " ALL_PROXY
Proxy URI for HTTP/HTTPS downloads during
.BR "sdme fs import" .
The first non\-empty variable found (in the order listed) is used.
Example:
.IR http://proxy:3128 .
Since
.B sdme
requires root, pass proxy variables through
.BR sudo (8)
with
.B \-E
or by setting them inline.
.TP
.BR no_proxy ", " NO_PROXY
Comma\-separated list of hosts or domains that should bypass the proxy.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B non\-zero
An error occurred.
Error messages are printed to standard error.
.SH EXAMPLES
Import an Ubuntu rootfs from a URL and create a container:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sdme fs import ubuntu https://example.com/ubuntu.tar.xz
sdme new mybox \-r ubuntu
.fi
.RE
.PP
Import a rootfs from an OCI registry:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sdme fs import fedora quay.io/fedora/fedora
sdme new \-r fedora
.fi
.RE
.PP
Import an OCI application image and run it inside a base container:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sdme fs import ubuntu docker.io/ubuntu:24.04
sdme fs import nginx docker.io/nginx \-\-base\-fs=ubuntu
sdme new \-r nginx
.fi
.RE
.PP
Run a command in a running container:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sdme exec mybox cat /etc/os\-release
.fi
.RE
.PP
Create a container with resource limits:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sdme new \-\-memory 2G \-\-cpus 2 mybox \-r ubuntu
.fi
.RE
.PP
Update limits on an existing container:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sdme set mybox \-\-memory 4G
.fi
.RE
.PP
Follow logs for a container:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sdme logs mybox \-f
.fi
.RE
.PP
Import a rootfs through an HTTP proxy:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sudo \-E sdme fs import ubuntu https://example.com/ubuntu.tar.xz
.fi
.RE
.PP
Or pass the proxy variable inline:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sudo https_proxy=http://proxy:3128 sdme fs import ubuntu https://example.com/ubuntu.tar.xz
.fi
.RE
.PP
Create a container with a private network, veth, and port forwarding:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sdme new \-\-private\-network \-\-network\-veth \-\-port 8080:80 webserver \-r ubuntu
.fi
.RE
.PP
Create containers in a shared network zone:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sdme new \-\-network\-zone myzone db \-r ubuntu
sdme new \-\-network\-zone myzone app \-r ubuntu
# app and db can now communicate over the shared zone network
.fi
.RE
.PP
Create a container with bind mounts and environment variables:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sdme new \-b /data:/mnt/data \-e LANG=C.UTF\-8 mybox \-r ubuntu
.fi
.RE
.PP
Build a custom rootfs from an imported base:
.PP
.RS
.nf
# Import a base rootfs
debootstrap \-\-include=dbus,systemd noble /tmp/ubuntu
sdme fs import ubuntu /tmp/ubuntu

# Create a build config
cat << EOF > examplefs.conf
FROM ubuntu
RUN apt\-get update
RUN apt\-get install \-y systemd\-container
COPY ./target/release/sdme /usr/local/bin/sdme
EOF

# Build the new rootfs and create a container
sdme fs build examplefs examplefs.conf
sdme new \-r examplefs
.fi
.RE
.PP
Create a hardened container with user namespace isolation and private network:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sdme new \-\-hardened \-r ubuntu
.fi
.RE
.PP
Create a container with maximum security (Docker\-equivalent restrictions):
.PP
.RS
.nf
sdme new \-\-strict \-r ubuntu
.fi
.RE
.PP
Create a container with fine\-grained security controls:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sdme new \-\-drop\-capability CAP_NET_RAW \-\-no\-new\-privileges \-\-read\-only \-r ubuntu
.fi
.RE
.PP
Run two containers in a shared pod network namespace:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sdme fs import ubuntu docker.io/ubuntu:24.04
sdme pod new my\-pod
sdme new \-\-pod=my\-pod \-r ubuntu db
sdme new \-\-pod=my\-pod \-r ubuntu app
# db and app can communicate via localhost
.fi
.RE
.PP
Run two OCI app containers in a shared pod network namespace:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sdme fs import nginx docker.io/nginx \-\-base\-fs=ubuntu
sdme pod new oci\-pod
sdme new \-\-oci\-pod=oci\-pod \-\-hardened \-r nginx web
# nginx binds port 80 on the pod's loopback
.fi
.RE
.SH RESOURCE LIMITS
Containers can have per\-container resource limits applied via systemd cgroup
controls.
Limits are stored in the container's state file and applied at start time
through a systemd drop\-in file at
.IR /etc/systemd/system/sdme@ name .service.d/limits.conf .
.PP
If no limits are set, no drop\-in is written.
.TP
.BI \-\-memory " size"
Maximum memory the container may use.
Maps to the systemd
.B MemoryMax=
directive.
Accepts a number with an optional suffix:
.BR K ", " M ", " G ", " T .
Example:
.BR 512M ", " 2G .
.TP
.BI \-\-cpus " n"
CPU time limit expressed as a number of CPUs.
Converted to the systemd
.B CPUQuota=
directive (e.g.\&
.B 2
becomes
.BR 200% ).
Accepts integers or decimals.
Example:
.BR 2 ", " 0.5 .
.TP
.BI \-\-cpu\-weight " w"
Relative CPU scheduling weight.
Maps to the systemd
.B CPUWeight=
directive.
Range: 1\(en10000 (default kernel weight is 100).
Lower values get proportionally less CPU time under contention.
.SH NETWORKING
By default, containers share the host's network namespace and have full network
access.
Network options control network isolation and connectivity.
These options are set at container creation time and cannot be changed afterward.
.TP
.B \-\-private\-network
Run the container in its own private network namespace, isolated from the host.
Without additional options, the container will only have a loopback interface.
.TP
.B \-\-network\-veth
Create a virtual ethernet pair connecting the container to the host.
Implies
.BR \-\-private\-network .
The host side of the veth is named
.IR ve\-<name> .
Requires network configuration inside the container (DHCP or static IP) and
NAT/routing on the host for external connectivity.
.TP
.BI \-\-network\-bridge " name"
Connect the container's veth interface to the specified host bridge.
Implies
.BR \-\-private\-network .
The bridge must already exist on the host.
Example:
.BR br0 .
.TP
.BI \-\-network\-zone " name"
Join a named network zone for inter\-container networking.
Implies
.BR \-\-private\-network .
Containers in the same zone can communicate via a virtual bridge that
.BR systemd\-nspawn (1)
creates automatically.
Example:
.BR myzone .
.TP
.BI \-\-port ", " \-p " " [proto:]host[:container]
Forward a port from the host to the container.
Implies
.BR \-\-private\-network .
The protocol prefix is
.B tcp
(default) or
.BR udp .
If the container port is omitted, the host port is used for both.
Can be specified multiple times for multiple ports.
Port forwarding requires a virtual ethernet pair to route traffic;
combine with
.BR \-\-network\-veth ,
.BR \-\-network\-bridge ,
or
.BR \-\-network\-zone .
The container must run
.BR systemd\-networkd (8)
to configure the container\-side interface via DHCP.
Example:
.BR 8080:80 ,
.BR tcp:8080:80 ,
.BR udp:53:53 .
.PP
Network configuration is stored in the container's state file and applied at
start time via environment variables in the systemd unit.
.SH OVERLAYFS OPAQUE DIRS
Directories listed with
.B \-o
(or
.BR \-\-overlayfs\-opaque\-dirs )
are created in the overlayfs upper layer with the
.B trusted.overlay.opaque
extended attribute set to
.BR y .
This makes overlayfs hide all lower\-layer contents for that directory,
so it starts empty inside the container.
Can be specified multiple times.
.PP
Each path must be absolute, must not contain
.B ..
components, and duplicates are rejected.
Trailing slashes are normalized.
.PP
For host\-rootfs containers (no
.BR \-r ),
if no
.B \-o
flags are given, the
.B host_rootfs_opaque_dirs
config value is applied automatically (default:
.BR /etc/systemd/system,/var/log ).
This prevents the host's systemd unit overrides and log history from
leaking into the container.
Set the config value to an empty string to disable this behavior.
For imported\-rootfs containers, no default opaque dirs are applied.
.SH BIND MOUNTS AND ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.BI \-b " HOST:CONTAINER[:ro]"
.TQ
.BI \-\-bind " HOST:CONTAINER[:ro]"
Bind mount a host path into the container.
Both paths must be absolute and must not contain
.B ..
components.
Append
.B :ro
for a read\-only mount.
Can be specified multiple times.
Example:
.BR "/data:/mnt/data" ,
.BR "/config:/etc/app:ro" .
.TP
.BI \-e " KEY=VALUE"
.TQ
.BI \-\-env " KEY=VALUE"
Set an environment variable for the container.
Can be specified multiple times.
Example:
.BR "LANG=C.UTF\-8" .
.PP
Bind mounts and environment variables are stored in the container's state file
and applied at start time via the systemd nspawn drop\-in configuration.
.SH OCI ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.BI \-\-oci\-env " KEY=VALUE"
Set an environment variable for the OCI app service.
Can be specified multiple times.
The value is written to
.I /oci/env
in the container's overlayfs upper layer.
The
.B sdme\-oci\-app.service
unit reads this file via
.BR EnvironmentFile= .
.PP
This is separate from
.BR \-e / \-\-env ,
which sets environment variables for the container's systemd init (PID 1) via
nspawn
.B \-\-setenv=
flags.
Use
.B \-\-oci\-env
for variables the OCI application needs (e.g.\&
.BR POSTGRES_PASSWORD ,
.BR REDIS_ARGS ).
.PP
Requires an OCI app rootfs (the rootfs must contain
.IR /oci/env ).
Example:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sdme create \-r postgresql \-\-oci\-env POSTGRES_PASSWORD=secret mydb
.fi
.RE
.SH OCI PORT FORWARDING
When creating a container from an OCI app rootfs that declares exposed ports
(in
.IR /oci/ports ),
sdme automatically adds port forwarding rules if the container has a private
network namespace (via
.BR \-\-private\-network ,
.BR \-\-hardened ,
or
.BR \-\-strict ).
Each OCI port is mapped from the same host port to the same container port
(e.g.\& tcp:80:80).
.PP
Port forwarding requires a virtual ethernet pair to route traffic between
host and container.
Combine
.B \-\-private\-network
with
.BR \-\-network\-veth ,
.BR \-\-network\-bridge ,
or
.B \-\-network\-zone
for ports to be reachable.
The container must have
.BR systemd\-networkd (8)
enabled so the container\-side interface
.RI ( host0 )
gets configured via DHCP.
.PP
User\-supplied
.B \-\-port
flags take priority: if you map a container port manually, the auto\-forward
for that port is skipped.
.PP
When the container uses host networking (no
.BR \-\-private\-network ),
ports are not forwarded (services bind directly to the host's interfaces).
An informational message listing the exposed ports is printed instead.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-oci\-ports
Suppress automatic port forwarding from OCI image metadata.
Ports declared in the image's
.I /oci/ports
file are ignored.
.SH OCI VOLUME MOUNTS
When creating a container from an OCI app rootfs that declares volumes
(in
.IR /oci/volumes ),
sdme automatically creates persistent host\-side directories and adds bind
mounts for each volume.
.PP
For each declared volume path (e.g.\&
.IR /var/lib/mysql ),
a host directory is created at
.IR /var/lib/sdme/volumes/ name / vol\-name
and bind\-mounted to
.IR /oci/root /var/lib/mysql
inside the container.
Volume data persists across container removal; when
.B sdme rm
deletes a container with OCI volumes, the volume directory path is printed
but the data is not deleted.
.PP
User\-supplied
.B \-\-bind
flags take priority: if you bind\-mount to the same container path that an
OCI volume targets, the auto\-mount for that path is skipped.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-oci\-volumes
Suppress automatic volume mounting from OCI image metadata.
Volumes declared in the image's
.I /oci/volumes
file are ignored.
.SH PODS
Pods provide a shared network namespace for multiple containers.
Containers in the same pod can reach each other via localhost.
.PP
Create a pod, then assign containers to it:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sdme pod new my\-pod
sdme create \-\-pod=my\-pod \-r ubuntu db
sdme create \-\-pod=my\-pod \-r ubuntu app
sdme start db app
.fi
.RE
.PP
There are two mechanisms for joining a pod:
.TP
.BI \-\-pod " name"
Join the named pod's network namespace (entire container).
The whole nspawn container, including init and all services, runs in the
pod's netns via
.BR \-\-network\-namespace\-path= .
Works with any container type (host\-rootfs or imported rootfs).
Mutually exclusive with
.BR \-\-private\-network .
Pod membership is stored in the container's state file as
.BR POD .
.TP
.BI \-\-oci\-pod " name"
Join the named pod's network namespace for the OCI app process only.
The pod's netns is bind\-mounted into the container, and an inner systemd
drop\-in makes only the
.B sdme\-oci\-app.service
process enter the pod's netns via
.BR NetworkNamespacePath= .
The container's init and other services remain in their own network namespace.
Requires an OCI app rootfs (the rootfs must contain
.IR sdme\-oci\-app.service )
and
.BR \-\-private\-network
(or
.BR \-\-hardened " / " \-\-strict ,
which imply it).
Pod membership is stored in the container's state file as
.BR OCI_POD .
.PP
Both flags are available on
.B sdme create
and
.BR "sdme new" .
They can be combined on the same container with different pods.
The pod's network namespace contains only a loopback interface.
.SH USER NAMESPACES
.TP
.BR \-u ", " \-\-userns
Enable user namespace isolation.
When enabled, container root (UID 0) maps to an unprivileged high UID on the
host (524288+, deterministically hashed from the container's machine name).
This prevents a container escape from gaining host root privileges.
.PP
Uses
.BR systemd\-nspawn (1)
flags
.B \-\-private\-users=pick
and
.BR \-\-private\-users\-ownership=auto .
On kernel 6.6+, overlayfs supports idmapped mounts, so files in the upper layer
stay UID 0 on disk while the container runs as a high UID on the host (zero
overhead).
On older kernels,
.B auto
falls back to recursive chown.
.PP
User namespace isolation is set at creation time and stored in the container's
state file as
.BR USERNS=yes .
.SH SECURITY HARDENING
Security hardening flags are available on
.B sdme create
and
.BR "sdme new" .
They are stored in the container's state file and applied at start time.
.TP
.B \-\-strict
Maximum security.
Implies
.B \-\-hardened
and adds Docker\-equivalent capability drops (retains only ~14 capabilities
plus
.B CAP_SYS_ADMIN
for systemd init), seccomp filters
.RB ( ~@cpu\-emulation ", " ~@debug ", " ~@obsolete ", " ~@raw\-io ),
and the
.B sdme\-default
AppArmor profile.
The AppArmor profile must be loaded before use; see
.BR "sdme config apparmor\-profile" .
.TP
.B \-\-hardened
Enable defense\-in\-depth defaults: user namespace isolation
.RB ( \-\-private\-users=pick ),
private network namespace, no\-new\-privileges, and capability drops
(configurable via the
.B hardened_drop_caps
config key; default:
.BR CAP_SYS_PTRACE,CAP_NET_RAW,CAP_SYS_RAWIO,CAP_SYS_BOOT ).
.TP
.BI \-\-drop\-capability " cap"
Drop a capability from the container's bounding set.
Accepts names with or without the
.B CAP_
prefix.
Can be specified multiple times.
Example:
.BR CAP_SYS_PTRACE ", " NET_RAW .
.TP
.BI \-\-capability " cap"
Add a capability to the container's bounding set (for capabilities not in
the default nspawn set).
Accepts names with or without the
.B CAP_
prefix.
Can be specified multiple times.
Specifying the same capability in both
.B \-\-drop\-capability
and
.B \-\-capability
is rejected.
Example:
.BR CAP_NET_ADMIN .
.TP
.B \-\-no\-new\-privileges
Prevent processes inside the container from gaining privileges via setuid
binaries or file capabilities.
Passes
.B \-\-no\-new\-privileges=yes
to
.BR systemd\-nspawn (1).
Note that this breaks
.BR sudo (8)
and
.BR su (1)
inside the container.
.TP
.B \-\-read\-only
Mount the container's overlayfs merged view as read\-only.
Applications that need writable areas should use bind mounts
.RB ( \-b ).
.TP
.BI \-\-system\-call\-filter " filter"
Apply an additional seccomp filter on top of nspawn's baseline.
Uses systemd's group syntax:
.B @group
to allow,
.B ~@group
to deny.
Can be specified multiple times.
Example:
.BR ~@raw\-io ", " ~@cpu\-emulation .
Note that
.B ~@mount
will break systemd inside the container.
.TP
.BI \-\-apparmor\-profile " name"
Apply an AppArmor profile to the container via the
.B AppArmorProfile=
directive in the systemd service unit drop\-in.
The profile must be loaded into the kernel before use.
Example:
.BR sdme\-default .
.PP
.B \-\-strict
and
.B \-\-hardened
set baselines that individual flags can override.
For example,
.B \-\-hardened \-\-capability CAP_NET_RAW
re\-enables a capability that
.B \-\-hardened
would otherwise drop.
.SH NOTES
.SS Umask
.B sdme create
and
.B sdme new
require a umask that does not strip read or execute from "other".
If the current umask has bits
.B 005
set (e.g.\&
.BR 007 ", " 027 ", " 077 ),
creation is refused with a diagnostic message.
.PP
This is because files written to the overlayfs upper layer inherit the
process umask, and non\-root services inside the container (such as
.I dbus\-daemon
running as
.IR messagebus )
need to traverse the filesystem.
The default umask
.RB ( 022 )
is sufficient.
.SS Ctrl+C during boot
Pressing Ctrl+C while
.B sdme new
or
.B sdme start
is waiting for the container to boot will cancel the wait.
For
.BR "sdme new" ,
the just\-created container is removed automatically.
For
.BR "sdme start" ,
the container is stopped but preserved on disk.
.SH SECURITY
.B sdme
runs as root and processes untrusted input (tarballs, OCI images, disk images,
URLs).
The following hardening measures are in place:
.SS Path traversal protection
OCI layer tar paths are sanitized before whiteout marker handling:
entries containing
.B ..
components are rejected, and leading
.B /
is stripped.
OCI digest fields in manifests are validated to contain only alphanumeric
and hex characters before being used to resolve blob paths.
The
.B \-\-rootfs
parameter is validated against the same naming rules as container names,
preventing directory traversal via crafted values like
.IR ../state .
.SS Download size limit
URL downloads during
.B sdme fs import
are limited to 50\ GiB to prevent disk exhaustion from malicious or
misbehaving servers.
Downloads exceeding this limit are aborted with an error.
.SS File permissions
The configuration file is written with mode
.B 0600
and its parent directories with mode
.BR 0700 ,
regardless of the process umask.
State files are created atomically with
.BR O_CREAT|O_EXCL .
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR systemd\-nspawn (1),
.BR machinectl (1),
.BR journalctl (1),
.BR qemu\-nbd (8),
.BR overlayfs (5),
.BR sudo (8)
